Winner of the New Colossus open call, Nory gains visibility thanks to Groover
écrit par Jade Robinot 19 August 2025

Winner of a New Colossus open call in partnership with Groover, we had the chance to discuss with Nory about his experience and his overall music career.

A true artist who shatters contemporary genres and boundaries, Nory is much more than a rapper. His approach and flow is often likened to the musicality of a jazz musician with the energy of Rage Against The Machine. Nory’s unending thirst for musical exploration has created a deep and diverse discography ranging from EDM Rap, explosive full band rock-hip hop, and experimental jazz.

Can you tell us a bit about your background and your music project? How did you start and what made you take it seriously?
My name is Nory, I started producing music 5-6 years ago on GarageBand with 0 prior musical experience and complete curiosity. Then, music suddenly became a daily practice and I started to obsessively immerse myself in production. Over the course of those years I also began exploring my voice by rapping over my produced music. Having released some projects and performed some shows in my hometown of Miami, I was ready to take the next step and move to New York City where I had always dreamt of living as an artist. 2 years later, I am living my dream life in New York City performing my original music multiple days a week with my band, hosting a weekly music event in Brooklyn, and frequenting music studios while finalizing my next album.

« Groover, and its community, created a very intentional and loving atmosphere. » – Nory


What inspires you and makes you want to create? Do you have any routines before you start working on music?
I am easily impressionable. When I hear a song or style of playing that stimulates me, I can’t get it out of my mind and want to embody the spirit of that music. Often times I’ll hear a record or see a live performance that immediately inspires me and I do my best to recreate it through my own arsenal of lyricism and production.


How would you describe your music? In your opinion, what’s the best way for someone to experience it?
My new music that I have been working on is a blend of Alternative Hip-Hop and Heavy Rock. Nu Metal energy meets Kendrick Lamar’s intention meets the fun and charisma of Outkast. I heavily emphasize the importance of live music and live performance within my artistry. You have to see me live to truly understand me as an artist.


How did you find out about Groover and what made you decide to use the platform?
I found out about Groover through my friend Adi Malka, the front man of Brooklyn based band Why Another. He invited me to their showcase in Lower East Side and I became a big fan of the platform.

How has it helped you? What opportunities have you gotten through Groover?
I have performed many times at Pianos but this was definitely my favorite show there. Everybody felt truly interested in what I was doing from the very beginning, plus my band and I felt super welcomed and appreciated from the moment we walked into the venue. Groover, and its community, created a very intentional and loving atmosphere.

👉 Follow him on Instagram


What are your upcoming projects and any other cool news you’d like to share with us?
I have a tour coming up at the end of April throughout the Northeast and a big show in NYC May 3rd at Brooklyn Made! This will be an amazing year for me and my music. Stay tuned for my album!

Read also: Stella. Reaches New Audiences by Sharing His Music on Groover